
Hypothesis: I unthinkingly assumed the one Jerry gave me (John H Crane stamp) was the HR I had initially collated, but now realize it's actually an HM, of which there should be another (?) in Special Collections. At one point I found HM identical in terms of variants with MC, but should check again now that I've got another sample. And now I have one (Valet Anchora Vertis plate), which seems to be a proper HR, except that I'm seeing "hours," instead of "bowers." which I had put down as an HR feature -- and I actually hadn't seen an "hours" with a comma before. I have MC down as "hours." -- which is possibly an instance of the scratching away of ink to do minor corrections (which I should go back and note.) So need to collate my new copies against MCs as well as HRs.

http://search.lib.virginia.edu/catalog/u1840489 (Moxon x3)
http://search.lib.virginia.edu/catalog/u1293642 (Hotten x3)
plus I have:
Hotten x2 (and one battered one on the way, plus one Hotten 4th edn)
New York edition x3
Moxon x1 (on the way)


*********

"A Bookman's Catalogue: the Norman Colbeck Collection of Nineteenth-Century and Edwardian Poetry and Belles Lettres," University of British Columbia Press 1987, volume 2. (Google Books)

13. Poems and Ballads. Moxon, 1866. Horizontally ribbed bevelled green cloth, spine gilt-lettered in 6 lines with short rule about and leaf ornament below author's name and between triple rules top and bottom of spine, publisher's monogram ornament in blind centre of upper side, top edges uncut, others trimmed, ream end-papers. Press notices of Atalanta and Chastelard, 8 pages, sewn between front end-papers. This copy has all the 10 cancel leaves pasted on stubs and the Press Notices also are in corrected state.  Signature, "J. Stirling." on title-page. Belonged later to Arthur Symons and has his signature: loosely inserted is one page of bibliographical notes on the book in his handwriting.

14. Poems and Ballads. John Camden Hotten, 1866. Vertically ribbed cloth, identical in all other details (including lettering &c.) with above copy. This copy, which has signature, "H. Strutt, 1866" on end-paper, is one of the small number of copies already in Moxon's binding when sheets &c. were handed over to Hotten. Title-page has been cut out and replaced by a quarter-sheet carrying half-title and title-page, the latter bearing the new publisher's name. All 10 leaves are cancels pasted on stubs, as in above copy. That these are indeed Moxon sheets, and not those reprinted by Hotten later in the same year is confirmed--were confirmation necessary--by the fact that p. 344 bears printer's imprint of Bradbury Evans & Co., and that the letters and figures of the gatherings throughout are in lower right-hand corner of page. Hotten's reprint is without a printer's imprint and gatherings are signed in centre of lower margins.


* * * *

http://www.leonardrobertsbookseller.com/

Swinburne, Algernon Charles, POEMS AND BALLADS (London: Edward Moxon & Co., 1866).  First edition, first issue, 17 x 10.5cm (16mo), in publisher's dark green horizontally-ribbed cloth w/embossed ruling to covers w/publ. device to fr. cover, gilt borders & title to spine, bevelled edges, cream ep.s, 344 (viii) pp. +8pp. reviews sewn in between fr. eps.  Printed by Bradbury Evans & Co., London.  Binding Very Good (extremities moderately bumped, & lt. rubbing to covers); contents Very Good (1st & final leaves foxed).  Slater 7, Vaughn [3], Ashley VI 58, Ehrsam & Deily 291, Fredeman p.217 ("it is difficult to assess clearly the tremedous importance of Poems and Ballads.  More than any other single volume it pointed toward the poetry of the future").  (Inv. #882)  $450


* * * *

from "Superb Collected Sets of the First Editions of Milton Coleridge Swinburne Wordsworth for sale by Charles Scribner's Sons... 1914." (Stanford UL, Google Books)

LAUS VENERIS. By Algernon Charles Swinburne. London: Edward Moxon & Co., Dover Street. 1866. 
8vo. In sheets. Entirely uncut. 
"Of this the first edition no copy is in the British Museum The only example of this exceptionally interesting little volume which has come into the market in recent years was priced £30." --TJ Wise in 1896 "'Laus Veneris was also included in 'Poems and Ballads,' Moxon 1866, pp. 11-30 (see infra) and has been retained in each succeeding edition. The pamphlet, Mr Swinburne has stated, was issued some months previous to the publication of that volume. VERY FEW COPIES WERE PRINTED, MOST OF WHICH WERE DISTRIBUTED AMONGST PRIVATE FRIENDS. 'In fact,' said Mr Swinburne, 'it was more an experiment to ascertain the public taste and forbearance than anything else. Moxon, I well remember, was terribly nervous in those days, and it was only the wishes of mutual good friends, coupled with his own liking for the ballads, that finally induced him to publish the book (Poems and Ballads) at all.'" --TJ Wise. 

POEMS AND BALLADS. By Algernon Charles Swinburne. London: Edward Moxon & Co., Dover Street. 1866. 
8vo. In the original green straight grained cloth boards, lettered in gilt across the back: "Poems & Ballads Swinburne London Moxon." 
Entirely uncut. 
Edward Moxon was not destined to retain for long the honour of publishing the first series of Poems and Ballads. He was rendered nervous (unwisely and needlessly nervous, as the event proved) by the unreasoning and hysterical criticism flung at the book and the storm of opposition roused by certain of its contents. He resigned his commission as Mr Swinburne's publisher, and allowed the "Poems and Ballads" together with "Chastelard" and the "Queen Mother, and Rosamond" to pass into the hands of John Camden Hotten. 

POEMS AND BALLADS. By Algernon Charles Swinburne. London: John Camden Hotten. Piccadilly. 1866. 
8vo. Original green cloth, entirely uncut. 
The second issue with Hotten's title page. 
The demand for "Poems and Ballads" must have been fairly brisk, for before the close of the year the quire stock received from Moxon had become exhausted and Hotten had reprinted the work. There is absolutely nothing upon the face of this volume to distinguish it from copies of the earlier issue or to denote that it is a second edition. The title-page is a facsimile of the one prepared by Hotten to accompany the copies in quires he had received from Moxon, while the body of the book (pp. 1-344) is a page-for-page and line-for-line reprint. Preliminary pages, however, differ from those of the earlier issue.

THE FIRST AMERICAN EDITION

Already in 1866, the year in which it first appeared in London, "Poems and Ballads" was reprinted in America under the following title-page:

LAUS VENERIS, and other Poems and Ballads, By Algernon Charles Swinburne.
New York, Carleton, Publisher, 413, Broadway, London: Moxon & Co. 1876
8vo. In the original brown cloth boards.
"The text is identical with the London editions.
"Why the book was published under the above title it is difficult to say. Possibly the discussion raised by 'Laus Veneris' in London had awakened curiosity in the United States, and the publishers looked to excite a larger sale for their book by distinctly showing that the chief offending poem was not excluded from its pages."--T.J. Wise.


* * * * 

http://www.find-a-book.com/db/detail.php?booknr=340054793

SWINBURNE, Algernon Charles.:
Poems and Ballads.
John Camden Hotten, 1866. Green vertical ribbed cloth, bevelled boards. Nice copy; extensive but very light pencillings in margins and on last couple of pages and rear end-papers. The unacknowledged second edition, first issue, with B1 integral and uncorrected.
GBP 30.00 order nr.: 6007
bookseller: Charles Cox Rare Books (GREAT BRITAIN)


* * * * 
Bibliographies of Swinburne Morris and Rossetti by Professor C. E. Vaughn.  The English Association Pamphlet No. 19, December 1914.

Poems and Ballads. First edition, Moxon, 1866 (a few months later than Laus Veneris). Transferred to Hotten (Moxon quailing before the storm) the same year. Second edition, Hotten, 1866. American edition (Carleton, New York), 1866. [Dolores was republished separately by Hotten in 1867.] Third edition, Chatto & Windus, 1878. French translation by Gabriel Mourey, with Notes sur Swinburne by Guy de Maupassant, 1989. N.B. The text of the first edition is exactly reproduced in all subsequent editions.



* * * * 

Bibliographical List of the Writings of Algernon Charles Swinburne (1905)

Author: Joseph Charles Thomson
Publisher: J. Thomson

(uncorrected Internet Archive OCR)

XIV 

Laus Veneris. By Algernon Charles Swinburne. Lon- 
don: Edward Moxon & Co. 1866. 

Crown 8vo., pp. 28, coloured paper wrappers. Issued for 
private circulation in a very limited edition — it is presumed 
to elicit opinions regarding * Poems and Ballads.* Among the 
rarest of Swinburneana. 

23/. 10s., *97j 13/., '98; 12/. 5;., *o3. 

XV 

Poems and Ballads. By Algernon Charles Swinburne. 
London: Edward Moxon & Co., Dover Street, 1866. 

r 

F*cap 8vo., green cloth boards, pp. viii 344, price 9;.; 
with printer's imprint at foot of p. 344: 'Bradbury and Evans, 
Printers, Whitefriars.* 

Almost as soon as issued the vol. was withdrawn by Moxon, 



14 BIBLIOGRAPHICAL LIST OF THE WRITINGS 

owing to the storm of disapproval with which it was greeted 
by the critics; Swinburne's reply was to change his publisher, 
and the sheets were transferred to Hotten and issued with his 
substituted title-page dated 1866 — the title-page being the only 
difference betyreen the tyto editions. A second edition, with type 
re-set, was issued by Hotten in 1866, pp. viii 344, with no 
indication anywhere that it is the second edition; the trick 
may be known by the imprint on reverse of title: 'London: 
Savill and Edwards, Printers, Chandos Street, Covent Garden.* 
Moxon edition in original cloth: 2/. 4^., 22s. (title torn), 
i/. 14J., '87; i/. 11;., 2/. I2J., *88; i/. iis.y '89; 2/. (calf ex. 
t. e. g. by Riviere), '90; i/. 16s., '93; 2/. 10s., i/. ys., '95; 
2/. 8j., '96; 3/. icj. (mor. ex. g. e.) *oo; 61., *oi ; 4/. lys. 6d. 
(mor ex. by Bedford), '02; 18/. los. (presentation copy with 
autograph), 8/. 15J., '03; 61. 15J., '04. 

Laus Veneris and Other Poems and Ballads. New 

York. 186X.U *^^ *> ^ ' : ='f 

First American — pirated — edition of Swinburne's poems, 
issued under this title so as to catch the benefit of the discussion 
aroused by the initial poem. Priced at about i $s, sometimes. 

XVI 

Notes on Poems and Reviewts. By Algernon Charles 
Sw^inburne. London: John Camden Hotten, Piccadilly, 
1866. 

8vo., sewn, uncut, no wrappers, pp. 24, price is. 

Swinburne's caustic retort to the critics of 'Poems and 
Ballads.* The first issue is very rare, and may be known by 
the imprint on reverse of title: 'London, Savill and Edwards, 
Printers, Chandos Street, Covent Garden.' This first issue 
is worth about 301. The second issue is an unauthorised re- 
print made by Hotten, according to his usual dishonest practice 
with no indication it is second edition; it may be known by 
the change in the title in the printers* imprint: 'Savill, Edwards 
and Co.* This issue is comparatively common, and worth 
about $s. 


* * * *

A STUDY OF SWINBURNE 

By T. Earle Welby 

1926

Note 

THE author desires to make cordial acknowledgment of 
the generosity with which Mr. T. J. Wise has thrown open 
to him that incomparable Swinburne collection which is 
the chief glory of the Ashley Library. He desires also to 
acknowledge his obligations to Sir Edmund Gosse's Life, 
a book which, as an official induction of a great poet to his 
place among his peers, is without rival in critical tact....


.....The poet's friends, with few exceptions, were
tremulous with anxiety, but the most of them had no 

1 Holograph letter from Pauline, Lady Trevelyan, to Swinburne, 
dated 6th December 1865, in Mr. Wise's collection. 



64 A STUDY OF SWINBURNE 

clear idea of the probable occasions of offence. They 
suggested or acquiesced in a preliminary test of the 
public's endurance being made with so comparatively 
innocuous a poem as " Laus Veneris ", in which the 
questionable matter might be supposed to have been 
made obligatory by the legend. That piece was 
accordingly issued by Moxon " a few months " l before 
the main volume appeared, but as the edition was very 
small and most of the copies seem to have been given 
away to friends, it is difficult to see how it can have 
tested the forbearance of the general public. Certainly, 
it remained unknown to those whose complacency was 
presently to be so disturbed by the Poems and Ballads, 
and who, under the rush and blare and blaze of that 
incursion into their tame garden and drowsy atmo- 
sphere were to develop so unprecedented a panic. 

Their rallied forces could not frighten the young 
intruder, who kept his suddenly won place on the 
desecrated and abruptly unpeopled lawn, and was no 
whit abashed when Morley, under cover of anonymity, 
called him " a fiery imp from the pit ", " the libidinous 
laureate of a pack of satyrs ". But Morley alone 
sufficed to scare his publisher into retreat. The notorious 
unsigned criticism by Morley appeared in the Saturday 
Review of the 4th August 1866; Moxon, as represented 
by Payne, next day notified the cessation of supplies of 
the book to the trade. The effects of Morley's article 
and of Payne's craven action were felt by Swinburne 
to the end of his life. 

Sir Edmund Gosse, who, with so many other critical 
gifts, has an extraordinary instinct for the detection of 
the external influences which shape literary reputations, 
has dwelt with emphasis on the immediate consequences 

1 Swinburne's own statement. There is no other evidence of the 
date of issue. The type is apparently that used for Moxon's edition 
of the Poems and Ballads, in which the piece was included. 


ANTECEDENTS 65 

of the notice in the Saturday Review. The most of us 
take a perverse pleasure in dilating on the crimes of our 
peccant ancestors, but, I will ask the reader to believe, 
it is not through the journalistic equivalent of that sort 
of piety that the obscurest Saturday Reviewer of to-day 
attaches to Morley's attack even more importance than 
Sir Edmund has done. Its appearance was one of the 
greatest misfortunes of Swinburne's career. 

It appeared before the offending volume of poems was 
generally on sale in the bookshops. Payne's cowardice 
arrested supplies next day, and the reading public was 
largely without the means of forming its own opinion. 
Meanwhile other papers commented on the Poems and 
Ballads only by echoing the Saturday. Ten, twenty, 
thirty years later the phrases brought up against Swin- 
burne were almost invariably those which had been 
quoted with fierce disapproval by the Saturday Re- 
viewer; and to this day, as far as I am aware, there has 
never been public condemnation of those which escaped 
him, as, for instance, the supremely audacious allusion to 
perhaps the most candidly physical love-lyric in Catullus. 

But it may be doubted if Swinburne fully foresaw how 
Morley's attack, repeated by so many others at the time, 
and then reproduced in paragraphs at third or fourth 
hand for years to come on the lower levels of criticism, 
would prejudice his future even after he had abandoned 
the themes and modified the methods to which Morley 
so strongly objected. Though this does not seem to 
have been observed even by recent writers on Swinburne, 
Morley's article, in the reverberations to which it gave 
rise, did more than bring down on his head in the 
middle 'sixties the wrath of those who were by tempera- 
ment the enemies of sensuality and extravagance; it 
made it certain that, decades later, the born admirers of 
Swinburne's earlier verse should lament disproportion- 
ately over the serener and aloofer lyrics of his old age. 



66 A STUDY OF SWINBURNE 

Presently there was a lull in the storm, but it had by 
no means blown over. The malignant and pseudonym- 
ous Robert Buchanan was to come, with his essay on 
"TKeTlesKly School of Poetry "; Mortimer Collins, 
whose hostility to Swinburne has escaped notice, but 
was pronounced and hurtful, was to appear; and there 
were periodically to be journalistic echoes of Morley's 
article. Swinburne, to be sure, was finding supporters. 
The youth of England was largely with him, and at 
Oxford and Cambridge copies of the Poems and Ballads 
were accepted in certain sets of " golden books of spirit 
and sense ", and paid the compliment of being mingled 
with other explosives in 5th of November fires. The 
poet had homage nearer home also, as he recorded with 
ecstasy; a young cousin of his suffered the extreme 
penalty of birching rather than comply with tutorial 
orders to leave the magical volume unread: 

" I must say though I was sorry for him, I was much 
tickled (otherwise tickled than he was, and elsewhere) at 
the idea of the blood from a young disciple having 
already watered the roots of the Church planted by me ; 
and we know that * Sanguis martyrum semen (so to 
speak) ecclesiae.' " 

But, with Burton and Whistler abroad and Lord 
Houghton assuming a kind of neutrality, Swinburne 
felt somewhat solitary. Refreshing himself, after the 
over-excitement of his life in London, by a sojourn in 
Wales with a new friend, George Powell, he began, 
however, to prepare for a further assault on British 
prudery which was to take shape in a novel, Balzacian 
to a certain extent, with inlaid poems ; he began to ponder 
the eventually completed, never published, Lesbia 
Brandon^ which was meant to scare Mrs. Grundy out of 
her remaining wits.


* * * * 

from "Bibliographies of Twelve Victorian Authors," T. Ehrsam and R. Deily, 1936 

Gosse, Sir Edmund William
"The attack on 'Poems and Ballads' in 1866." T L S D20 '23 p.896


[Note on new and unexpurgated edition of Swinburne's Poems and Ballads] Ath 2:501 o 20 '66.


["Poems and Ballads" 1st series withdrawn from circulation] Ath 2:221 Ag 18 '66; Illustrated London News 49:190 Ag 25 '66.


Poems and ballads. [first series] London, Moxon, 1866. vii, 344p. (Rev by J. B. Taylor in No Am 104: 287-92 Ja '67; Liv Age 90:633-6 S 8 '66; Nation (NY) 3:446-7 D 6 '66; L. Etienne in R Deux Mondes 2d ser 69: 309-17 My 15 '67; J Morley in Sat R. 22:145-7 Ag 4 '66; same. Ecl M 67:556-60 N '66; R. Buchanan in Ath 2:137-8 Ag 4 '66; F. Thompson in Acad 66:680-1 Je 25 '04; Lit W 9:37 Ag '78 Ecl M 143:555-60 o '04; Ath 1:775-6 Je 18 '04; Sat R 98:17-18 Jl 2 '04; Literary World (Lond) ns 69:580-1 Je 17 '04' H. D. Davry in Mercure Fr 51:818-20 S ''04; Spec 39:1228-9 N 3 '66; Reader 7:675 Jl 28 '66; London Review 13:130-1 Ag 4 '66; Lit Digest 29:225-6 Ag 20 '04' Pall Mall Gazette p9-11 Ag 20 '66; Tablet p506 Ag 11' 66; Fun p236 Ag 18 '66; Notes & Q 10th ser 1:518-19 Je 25 '04; Liv Age 242-438-43 Ag 13 '04; H. Morley in Examiner p597-9 S 22 '66; Lord Houghton in Examiner p672 o 6 '66)


* * * *

from "Swinburne's proof sheets and American first editions," by Flora Virginia Milner Livingston, 1920

'Poems and Ballads,' 1866, was first published by Edward Moxon & Co., who transferred it to John Camden Hotten & Co., by whom several editions were issues. Some of these are the sheets of the Moxong edition with a new title-page, some have a corrected text and a new title-page, and otehrs again are entirely reset. G. W. Carelton, New York, published the first American edition with the title 'Laus Veneris,' using the text of the first edition published by Edward Moxon & co., with all the errata except on e of page 338. The poem 'Laus Veneris,' which had called forth so much criticism when published separately in 1866, before the 'Poems and Ballads' was issued, is placed first in the book, to which it gave the title, instead of third as in the London edition.

Swinburne wrote on November 21, 1866, 'I have gone through five editions in as many days in America; a sterile success which brings much clamour and no profit with it.' Mr. Gosse states in 'The Life of Swinburne.' 'His American publisher made a spirited fight but... bowed before the strom and withdrew the book neglecting to pay the royalties.' Mr. Wise says, 'The book passed through three editions in three months.' Copies appear with the title-page dated 1866, 1867, and 1868. What is supposed to be the first edition was bound in brown cloth with indigo blue edges, and should have a cream colored slip pasted on the title-page containing an extract from the 'London Examiner.'

At Harvard there is a copy of the first edition dated 1866, having the ornament, a chained book, on p.iv, printed upside down. Another copy has it placed correctly. Until a large number of copies dated 1866 have been carefully compared, it will apparently be unsafe to say with any confidence whether there were the frequent printings of which Swinburne had heard.

* * * *

from The bibliography of Swinburne: a bibliographical list, arranged in chronological order, of the published writings in verse and prose of Algernon Charles Swinburne (1857-1887) [4th ed.] Published 1887 by G. Redway in London.

Swinburne, "Poems and Ballads." --Two notes on a misstatement in a London bookseller's catalogue, respecting the original edition of "Poems and Ballads," published by Moxon and Co. in 1866. --Athenaeum March 10 and 24, 1877 (pp. 319-20; 383).

* * * *

from The Victorians Institute Journal, Volume 18 (1990)

A Short Note on the Swinburne Manuscripts at Worcester College, Oxford

Rikki Rooksby

A copy of Poems and Ballads has pasted into its front a letter in Swinburne's hand addressed to the Athenaeum, March 10th, 1877. The text is printed in Lang, The Swinburne Letters (Vol. 3, 296), a spirited public scotching of the idea that the 1866 book was ever reprinted with some of its original contents suppressed.

* * * *

Coming from Charles Cox Rare Books: "Publisher: John Camden Hotten, 1866. Green vertical ribbed cloth, bevelled boards. Nice copy; extensive but very light pencillings in margins and on last couple of pages and rear end-papers. The unacknowledged second edition, first issue, with B1 integral and uncorrected."  ARRIVED

Coming from Ebay: "Edward Moxon & Co., London, 1866.  Acceptable condition.  Cover separating and worn.  Bookplate inside cover."  ARRIVED

Coming from Collector's Cabinet and Robert S. Brooks: two more copies of Laus Veneris. ARRIVED